System for Simulating Polities and Society
Currently, polities wage war based on randomness. Decision to go to war should be more deterministic. There should be the ability to discourage warfare, pushing it away into higher levels of communities, like large-scale polities. Smaller communities merely provide resources to the polity, and the polity in turn provides them safety. Division of labor, resource extracting communities will improve at their trade, while the warfare part of the polity will improve in warfare.

New Sociopolitical Simulation System
Main driver of change: Population growth
Population will be directly told to grow by the simulation. Mechanics will be based directly or indirectly from population, carrying capacity of tiles, and its change. Population changes through growth, decline, and movement/migration.
Another fundamental mechanic is wealth and its movement, trade. Initially, wealth is produced from the earth, by people. They extract it, and can even grow it through agriculture. Secondary industries will appear, using the resources extracted. Certain resources are rare, and some resources can exist in deposits. One of the first resources to be in large-scale trade was tin, as it was rare but appeared in concentrated locations. Maybe simulate this by depositing certain resources in specific locations. Should be done at beginning of simulation and base it off of geography and biomes (for agricultural products).
Polities can benefit off of trade by being the middle man and by being a valuable part of the movement of goods. Tolls, caravans, etc. could be represented. Polities with many centers of trade should benefit off of them. Polities with valuable trade resources should also benefit.
Maybe simulate different kinds of thresholds. For example, when a territory becomes overpopulated and unable to sustain a large population, have the population emmigrate. Population capacities should be based on biome and land development. Additionally, if a polity is developed enough, they could invade other lands in order to bring wealth back to the overpopulated lands. This would both sustain the large population and help improve land development using more resources. Overpopulated communities should seek to solve the needs for sustaining their population. Events can also cause communities to become extremely overpopulated, causing mass emmigration or famine. Events such as raids, natural disasters, etc can decrease population capacity. Polities that are attacked should develop defensive technologies. This can be done simply by having a chance of defense increasing based on being attacked.

Maybe initially have warfare based on resources. Communities raid other communities when their land can't sustain their population. Then, warfare could develop to be based on defensive measures. Communities conquer other communities in order to create buffer land and 'emergency' resource source. If a group of communities is threatened, they'll pool their resources to combat the problem.